Feature/2020 03 28 healthcare on fhir (#596)
ordina-jworks/ordina-jworks.github.io: _posts/2020-03-28-Healthcare-on-FHIR.md

---
layout: post
authors: [martin_kwee]
title: 'Healthcare on FHIR'
image: /img/2020-03-28-Healthcare-on-FHIR/FHIR_logo.png
tags: [eHealth, Architecture, FHIR, Interoperability]
category: eHealth
comments: true
---

# And then there was FHIR

> The healthcare industry is currently buried under mountains of data, and much of it is unorganized or out of reach. For instance, care givers who are responsible for emergency care may not always have the patient's history they need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The healthcare industry is currently buried under mountains of data, and much of it is unorganized or out of reach. For instance, care givers who are responsible for emergency care may not always have access to the patient's history they need.
```

This might force them to resort to guessing or basing their treatment on the information the patient provides. If the patient is unable to give a medical history or other information such as allergies, the problem gets worse.

Exchanging healthcare information in a safer and faster manner is therefore a primary goal in the healthcare industry.
Software developers and IT professionals in this industry are tasked with integrating software applications without sacrificing security of sensitive patient information.

Today's health IT environment is also very fragmented. 

> Integrating with different health systems as well as sharing data has been a difficult and expensive process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Integrating with different health systems as well as sharing data is a difficult and expensive process.
```

- Patient-centric healthcare: the patient is in control of his own medical data therefore sharing data across organizations and disciplines becomes more important.
- Shift from offline to online, from desktop to cloud and from desktop to tablet.
  FHIR is based on the REST architectural style, thus being suitable for lightweight devices.
- Data transparency becomes more and more important. 
  FHIR acts as an ‘Open API’ to access data silos so systems can more easily collaborate with each other.
- Data analytics is a hot topic and requires data transparency but also for the data itself to be in a format which is optimized for analysis.
  Standardized and well-documented models as well as support for JSON-like formats by modern databases make FHIR an interesting choice.

> “The intended scope of FHIR is broad, covering human and veterinary, clinical care, public health, clinical trials, administration and financial aspects. The standard is intended for global use and in a wide variety of architectures and scenarios.”
> 
>  *- HL7 (Health Level Seven International)*

This relatively new protocol has several advantages:

> - The FHIR specification is free for use, open source with no restrictions and entirely available online at [https://www.hl7.org/fhir/](https://www.hl7.org/fhir){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The FHIR specification is free to use, open source with no restrictions and entirely available online at [https://www.hl7.org/fhir/](https://www.hl7.org/fhir){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}.
```

The Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) is a subset of IoT devices that captures and transmits patient-generated health data (PGHD). 
IoMT represents one of the largest technology revolutions and is growing at a lightning pace. 
The mountains of PGHD are growing every day but remain meaningless to healthcare providers if they're not able to access the essence of the data quickly and easily. 
FHIR may be the glue between your electronic health record (EHR) on the one hand and your smart electric toothbrush, blood glucose monitor and fitness tracker on the other hand.
It allows connecting PGHD to streamlined healthcare provider workflows and filtering the bulk-load of data in a way that makes the data useful and actionable for your care provider.

Patients who see multiple care providers in different health systems might no longer have to worry about having three or four patient portals from organizations using different EHRs.
One single personal health record, which integrates data from different formats, can deliver a comprehensive view of all medications, problems, and allergies. 

> FHIR includes all aspects of healthcare-related interoperability through RESTful APIs and a common format for hundreds of clinical data models. This is useful ...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
FHIR includes all aspects of healthcare-related interoperability through RESTful APIs and a common format for hundreds of clinical data models. This is useful for: 
```

> - for healthcare integrators: Transitioning to FHIR formatted XML/JSON objects in a RESTful architecture will enable you to have atomic data access to individual items within a resource, for example the Patient demographics or Observations for lab results.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- healthcare integrators: Transitioning to FHIR formatted XML/JSON objects in a RESTful architecture will enable you to have atomic data access to individual items within a resource, for example the Patient demographics or Observations for lab results.
```

> - for healthcare systems: Building and running applications on this API standard will result in richer products with data connected from external systems.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- healthcare systems: Building and running applications on this API standard will result in richer products with data connected from external systems.
```

> - as a patient: You can get and share your medical data in more ways than ever before, including with apps that you use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- patient: You can get and share your medical data in more ways than ever before, including with apps that you use.
```

- FHIR developers participate actively on [StackOverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/hl7_fhir){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}.
- [DevDays](https://www.devdays.com/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} is the most important and largest FHIR-only event in the world.
  The DevDays mission is to give health IT professionals around the the world the opportunity to learn about FHIR, to meet with colleagues and exchange ideas, and to apply what they have learned in their day-to-day work.

# What does FHIR look like?
The following patient browser application gives an idea of what FHIR looks like and how easy it is to exchange data: [https://patient-browser.smarthealthit.org](https://patient-browser.smarthealthit.org){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}. 
Definitely check out this demo app!

## FHIR Resources
A resource is the smallest unit of exchange with a defined behavior and meaning in interoperability, such as a Patient, a Device, an Observation, an Allergy Intolerance, ... .
It has an identity and location (URI) where it can be found.

> Furthermore is it made up of elements of a particular datatype, and can be represented either as an XML document or a JSON document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, it is made up of elements of a particular datatype, and can be represented either as an XML document or a JSON document.
```

{: refdef}
{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
Mixed FHIR/Proprietary API with existing back-end
{: refdef}

### Native FHIR server with FHIR back-end
This architecture is a FHIR-native solution because FHIR becomes the central design element of the system. 
FHIR is used as a platform specification that is stored directly in the SQL or NoSQL back-end data store and comes with some powerful features:
- a healthcare domain model (aka the Resources) and its extension capabilities
- description of the types of search capabilities supported by a FHIR server
- description for a FHIR server to advertise its capabilities to other systems

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
<img src="{{ '/img/2020-03-28-Healthcare-on-FHIR/fhir-fhir-backend.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="Native FHIR server with FHIR back-end" class="image" style="margin:0px auto; max-width:100%">
{: refdef}
{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
Native FHIR server with FHIR back-end
{: refdef}

# Summary
Today, there's lots of buzz about FHIR.
You might find it anywhere from federal agencies to major technology companies.

> Google, Microsoft and Apple all have thrown their considerable weight and cloud-based resources behind FHIR and are improving interoperability in healthcare.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Google, Microsoft and Apple have all thrown in their considerable weight and cloud-based resources behind FHIR and are improving interoperability in healthcare.
```
